%% intro.tex

On May 29, 1919 during a total solar eclipse, three scientists, Eddington,
Dyson, and Davidson, tried to find out what effect, if any, is produced by a
gravitational field on the path of a light ray traversing
it~\cite{Eddington1920}.  During a thoroughly prepared expedition, they measured
the deflection of positions of stars in the well-known Hyades constellation
caused by the mass of the Sun as predicted by the theory of gravity, general
relativity.  This was the first observation of gravitational lensing, as well as
the first predicted and validated effect of general
relativity~\cite{Einstein1911}.

Effectively, gravitational lensing is entirely analogous to optical lenses. In
fact, to produce the distorted light signatures like they are observed in
gravitational lens systems, one only needs a stem and the base from a wine glass
and move it in front of a light source.
\href{https://phdenzel.github.io/zurich-lens/}{phdenzel.github.io/zurich-lens/}
provides an interactive toy example of such a situation.  In optics, the lens
comprises a glass sheet of variable thickness.  It deflects light by an amount
proportional to the local depth.  The physical process which causes the change
of direction when a ray traverses a glass lens, is called refraction.  It
describes the delay, i.e. decrease in speed of light, due to the change of media
and therefore a change in direction.  While the result of lensing is the same
for both optical and gravitational lenses, the latter causes the delay and
deflection due to the change of the felt gravitational potential as light moves
through it.  The rather rare occurrence of a perfect alignment of a background
source, a quasar for instance, and a massive foreground lens in which the imaged
source is distorted in a way such that it can be observed multiple times or even
as a ring wrapping around the lens, is called \textit{strong} gravitational
lensing.  \figref{mock-lens} demonstrates such a case with a mock lens.
%
\begin{figure}[h]%
    \centering%
    \includegraphics[width=0.49\textwidth]{m82-original}\,%
    \includegraphics[width=0.49\textwidth]{m82-lensmock}
    \caption[Mock lens image of M82]{Mock lens observation: The left image shows
      the "Cigar Galaxy" M82 cutout from
      \href{https://apod.nasa.gov/apod/ap200515.html}{APOD 2020 May 15}. The
      right image demonstrates what it could look like, if a small black hole
      for instance with 3 times the mass of the Sun would replace the Moon
      (\textcolor{red}{TODO: check calculation again, angular size of 10
      arcmin}).  The right image was generated using my lens mock code:
      \Code{lensing.js} \cite{lensing.js}.\\
      \textit{Image Credit \& Copyright: Dietmar Hager, Torsten
        Grossmann}}%
    \figlbl{mock-lens}%
\end{figure}%
%

More specifically, the deflection in gravitational lensing is of the order of
$4M/R$, where $M$ is the mass of the lens and $R$ its size.  Strong
gravitational lensing occurs when the apparent size $R/D$ of the aligned lens at
a distance $D$ is comparable to that deflection \sidecite{MagicEnv}.  In fact,
although the underlying physical process is all the same, gravitational lensing
is categorised into three types based on the observational techniques and mass
or size regimes: and \textit{micro}, \textit{strong}, and \textit{weak} lensing.
Note that in the following equation and the entire introduction of this thesis,
we assume $c=G=1$, which enables us to express distances and masses in units of
seconds, mass densities and velocity gradients in units of squared seconds etc.
%
\begin{equation}\eqlbl{lensing_types}%
  \begin{aligned}
    \text{micro} \hspace{1cm}&\frac{4M}{R} \gg \frac{R}{D}\\
    \text{strong} \hspace{1cm}&\frac{4M}{R} \gtrsim \frac{R}{D}\\
    \text{weak} \hspace{1cm}&\frac{4M}{R} < \frac{R}{D}
  \end{aligned}
\end{equation}%
%
Microlensing is in many cases due to small, compact, and massive objects such as
stars, or even exoplanets around stars.  While it technically also projects a
source in multiple images, their angular separation is typically of the order of
microarcseconds --- hence the name --- and therefore impossible to resolve with
even the most modern telescopes. Nevertheless, in microlensing the changes in
the source alignments express as changes in apparent brightness, which is
detectable over an observation period of $\sim100$ days.  Weak lensing on the
other hand, happens when the gravitational field of the lens is not strong
enough to create multiple images, and the observable effect is a distortion
which is only detectable in a statistical sense.

Most gravitational lenses lie at cosmological distances, and only very massive,
large, and mass-concentrated objects can in this case lead to strong lensing
features.  Galaxies are vast cosmic islands of stars, gas, dust, and mainly
non-luminous matter held together by gravity.  This puts them in an ideal mass
and size range to act as such strong-lensing systems.  Based on most recent
observations, it is estimated that there are more than 2 trillion galaxies in
the Universe \sidecite{Conselice16}, however so far less than a thousand
gravitational lenses have been found across various data sets.  This makes them
quite the rare beasts in comparison\dots\ at least for now.  Future space and
ground-based telescope missions however, such as the \textit{Square Kilometer
Array} (SKA), the \textit{Vera Rubin Observatory} (formerly known as
\textit{Large Synoptic Survey Telescope}, or LSST), the \textit{James Webb Space
Telescope} (JWST), and \textit{Euclid} are expected to find orders of magnitudes
more.  This is very promising for science, because, due to their very special
circumstances, lensing galaxies and their configurations can be modelled and
give otherwise unobtainable insights into galaxy structure. The task of lens
models is to describe particular shapes of the lensing galaxy's mass
distribution which produces deflections of one or more background sources which
agree with the observed lensed images.  The fact that gravity and thus lensing
is indiscriminate of the kinds of matter which cause the deflections, makes it
all the more interesting.  In this regard, gravitational lenses are often seen
as 'proof'\sidenote{Not the only proof, as explained in following sections.} for
invisible and non-luminous matter, commonly called \textit{dark matter}, without
which the observed deflections due to galaxies cannot be explained by general
relativity.

Finding connections between these matter components, how they assembled, and how
they dynamically interact within galaxies is still subject of ongoing research.
Solving galaxy formation and evolution is a crucial part in understanding the
evolution of the Universe as a whole and the physical laws driving it.  During
the last two decades, large-scale hydrodynamical simulations have yielded great
successes and managed to produce galaxy models which agree with astronomical
observations incredibly well.  In contrast, lens models still struggle to
conform with physical properties and are hard to interpret.  Some describe lens
reconstruction techniques as 'black art' \sidecite{SaasFee}, perhaps because
they produce models which are, if at all, only barely motivated by physical
processes which are believed to be key in the dynamics of galaxies. Another
reason might be the confusion seeded by very opposing opinions\sidenote{Excerpt
from \citeay{SaasFee}: "I will argue that the parametric models are all that is
needed to model lenses and that they provide a better basis for understanding
the results than non-parametric models (but the reader should be warned that if
Prasenjit Saha was writing this you would probably get a different opinion)."}
of how these lens models should be constructed.  Nevertheless, while there are
advocates for certain (and not other) approaches, they all agree that these lens
systems are, scientifically speaking, highly valuable and promise to uncover
mysteries surrounding galaxy evolution, the nature of dark matter, galaxy
substructures, and the expansion of the Universe.

The main theme of this thesis is to explore old and new ways of connecting the
three cornerstones of lensing research, \textit{lensing galaxies} from
observations, \textit{lens models} which try to reproduce observations, and
\textit{simulations} of galaxies.  The following chapters detail projects with
that aim, each designated by a project name: \Code{DELAYS}~(\chref{delays}),
\Code{FOSSIL}~(\chref{fossil}), \Code{ADLER}~(\chref{adler}), and
\Code{MATCH}~(\chref{match}).

%
\begin{figure}[h]%
    \centering%
    \includegraphics[width=0.99\textwidth]{scheme}%
    \caption[Conceptual research graph]{Conceptual graph: the outline of this
        fictional lensing system perfectly construes the current state of
        lensing research.  Simulations of galaxies have been shown to be
        physically realistic and have successfully been inferred by lens models
        in (blind) tests.  However, lens models still struggle to uniquely
        describe lensing galaxies in observations and a direct link from
        simulations to lensing galaxies has so far never even been explored
        before.  The projects in the subsequent chapters thematise these
        subjects and their connections.  }%
    \figlbl{concept}%
\end{figure}%
%

Attempts to describe lensing galaxies with models of lens systems have been made
since the very first discovery by~\sideciteay{Walsh1979} in 1979.  In
\chref{delays} and \chref*{fossil}, new techniques were developed to optimise
lens recovery --- still rather traditionally --- with time delay measurements or
stellar population synthesis models respectively.  Even with more physical
information on the lensing galaxies, the models were difficult to properly
constrain and revealed certain issues and limitations.  The subsequent project
in \chref{adler} reports on a blind test which further explores these problems
with mock lenses from large-scale hydrodynamical simulations.  Particularly hard
to solve is the issue of degeneracies, the fact that a lens configuration can be
caused by many, differently shaped lenses, which is a long-known, inherent
limitation to lens models.  It also proposes analysis techniques which can be
employed in this case to isolate these problems.  Finally, \chref{match} gives
proof-of-concept for an entirely new strategy, a lens 'matching' technique,
which provides a direct link from simulations to lensing galaxies in
observations.

The following sections introduce the subsequent chapters and cover some basics
and related topics in the schematic of \figref{concept}.  They elaborate on a
few key aspects in cosmology (\secref{exp_universe}), some basic lensing theory
(\secref{lensing}), and theoretical and observational background related to
galactic dynamics, in particular focusing on topics relevant to galaxies in
lensing systems (\secref{galaxies}).  Finally, the subsequent chapters are put
into context and shortly summarized in \secref{summary}.

%\clearpage
\section{The expanding Universe}\seclbl{exp_universe}
\input{tex/exp_universe}
%\clearpage
\section{Lens models}\seclbl{lensing}
\input{tex/lensing}
%\clearpage
\section{Galaxies}\seclbl{galaxies}
\input{tex/galaxies}
%\clearpage
\section{Summary}\seclbl{summary}
\input{tex/summary}
